What Is Poetry?
by John Stuart Mill
It has often been asked, What Is Poetry? And many and various are the answers which
have been returned. The vulgarest of all--one with which no person possessed of the
faculties to which poetry addresses itself can ever have been satisfied--is that which
confounds poetry with metrical composition; yet to this wretched mockery of a definition
many have been led back by the failure of all their attempts to find any other that would
distinguish what they have been accustomed to call poetry from much which they have
known only under other names.
That, however, the word "poetry" imports something quite peculiar in its nature;
something which may exist in what is called prose as well as in verse; something which
does not even require the instrument of words, but can speak through the other audible
symbols called musical sounds, and even through the visible ones which are the language
of sculpture, painting, and architecture--all this, we believe, is and must be felt, though
perhaps indistinctly, by all upon whom poetry in any of its shapes produces any
impression beyond that of tickling the ear. The distinction between poetry and what is not
poetry, whether explained or not, is felt to be fundamental; and, where every one feels a
difference, a difference there must be. All other appearances may be fallacious; but the
appearance of a difference is a real difference. Appearances too, like other things, must
have a cause; and that which can cause anything, even an illusion, must be a reality. And
hence, while a half-philosophy disdains the classifications and distinctions indicated by
popular language, philosophy carried to its highest point frames new ones, but rarely sets
aside the old, content with correcting and regularizing them. It cuts fresh channels for
thought, but does not fill up such as it finds ready-made: it traces, on the contrary, more
deeply, broadly, and distinctly, those into which the current has spontaneously flowed.
Let us then attempt, in the way of modest inquiry, not to coerce and confine Nature
within the bounds of an arbitrary definition, but rather to find the boundaries which she
herself has set, and erect a barrier round them; not calling mankind to account for having
misapplied the word "poetry," but attempting to clear up the conception which they
already attach to it, and to bring forward as a distinct principle that which, as a vague
feeling, has really guided them in their employment of the term.
The object of poetry is confessedly to act upon the emotions; and therein is poetry
sufficiently distinguished from what Wordsworth affirms to be its logical opposite;
namely, not prose but matter of fact, or science. The one addresses itself to the belief; the
other, to the feelings. The one does its work by convincing or persuading; the other, by
moving. The one acts by presenting a proposition to the understanding; the other, by
offering interesting objects of contemplation to the sensibilities.
This, however, leaves us very far from a definition of poetry. This distinguishes it from
one thing; but we are bound to distinguish it from everything. To bring thoughts or
images before the mind, for the purpose of acting upon the emotions, does not belong to
poetry alone. It is equally the province (for example) of the novelist; and yet the faculty
of the poet and that of the novelist are as distinct as any other two faculties; as the
faculties of the novelist and of the orator, or of the poet and the metaphysician. The two
characters may be united, as characters the most disparate may; but they have no natural
connection.
Many of the greatest poems are in the form of fictitious narratives; and, in almost all
good serious fictions, there is true poetry. But there is a radical distinction between the
interest felt in a story as such, and the interest excited by poetry; for the one is derived
from incident, the other from the representation of feeling. In one, the source of the
emotion excited is the exhibition of a state or states of human sensibility; in the other, of
a series of states of mere outward circumstances. Now, all minds are capable of being
affected more or less by representations of the latter kind, and all, or almost all, by those
of the former; yet the two sources of interest correspond to two distinct and (as respects
their greatest development) mutually exclusive characters of mind.
At what age is the passion for a story, for almost any kind of story, merely as a story, the
most intense? In childhood. But that also is the age at which poetry, even of the simplest
description, is least relished and least understood; because the feelings with which it is
especially conversant are yet undeveloped; and, not having been even in the slightest
degree experienced, cannot be sympathized with. In what stage of the progress of society,
again, is storytelling most valued, and the storyteller in greatest request and honor? In a
rude state like that of the Tartars and Arabs at this day, and of almost all nations in the
earliest ages. But, in this state of society, there is little poetry except ballads, which are
mostly narrative--that it, essentially stories--and derive their principal interest from the
incidents. Considered as poetry, they are of the lowest and most elementary kind: the
feelings depicted, or rather indicated, are the simplest our nature has; such joys and griefs
as the immediate pressure of some outward event excites in rude minds, which live
wholly immersed in outward things, and have never, either from choice or force they
could not resist, turned themselves to the contemplation of the world within. Passing now
from childhood, and from the childhood of society, to the grown-up men and women of
this most grown-up and unchildlike age, the minds and hearts of greatest depth and
elevation are commonly those which take greatest delight in poetry; the shallowest and
emptiest, on the contrary, are, at all events, not those least addicted to novel-reading. This
accords, too, with all analogous experience of human nature. The sort of persons whom
not merely in books, but in their lives, we find perpetually engaged in hunting for
excitement from without, are invariably those who do not possess, either in the vigor of
their intellectual powers or in the depth of their sensibilities, that which would enable
them to find ample excitement nearer home. The most idle and frivolous persons take a
natural delight in fictitious narrative: the excitement it affords is of the kind which comes
from without. Such persons are rarely lovers of poetry, though they may fancy
themselves so because they relish novels in verse. But poetry, which is the delineation of
the deeper and more secret workings of human emotion, is interesting only to those to
whom it recalls what they have felt, or whose imagination it stirs up to conceive what
they could feel, or what they might have been able to feel, had their outward
circumstances been different.
Poetry, when it is really such, is truth; and fiction also, if it is good for anything, is truth:
but they are different truths. The truth of poetry is to paint the human soul truly: the truth
of fiction is to give a true picture of life. The two kinds of knowledge are different, and
come by different ways, come mostly to different persons. Great poets are often
proverbially ignorant of life. What they know has come by observation of themselves:
they have found within them one highly delicate and sensitive specimen of human nature,
on which the laws of emotion are written in large characters, such as can be read off
without much study. Other knowledge of mankind, such as comes to men of the world by
outward experience, is not indispensable to them as poets; but, to the novelist, such
knowledge is all in all; he has to describe outward things, not the inward man; actions
and events, not feelings; and it will not do for him to be numbered among those, who, as
Madame Roland said of Brissot, know man, but not men.
All this is no bar to the possibility of combining both elements, poetry and narrative or
incident, in the same work, and calling it either a novel or a poem; but so may red and
white combine on the same human features or on the same canvas. There is one order of
composition which requires the union of poetry and incident, each in its highest kind --
the dramatic. Even there, the two elements are perfectly distinguishable, and may exist of
unequal quality and in the most various proportion. The incidents of a dramatic poem
may be scanty and ineffective, though the delineation of passion and character may be of
the highest order, as in Goethe's admirable "Torquato Tasso"; or, again, the story as a
mere story may be well got up for effect, as is the case with some of the most trashy
productions of the Minerva Press: it may even be, what those are not, a coherent and
probable series of events, though there be scarcely a feeling exhibited which is not
represented falsely, or in a manner absolutely commonplace. The combination of the two
excellences is what renders Shakespeare so generally acceptable, each sort of readers
finding in him what is suitable to their faculties. To the many, he is great as a storyteller;
to the few, as poet.
In limiting poetry to the delineation of states of feeling, and denying the name where
nothing is delineated but outward objects, we may be thought to have done what we
promised to avoid -- to have not found, but made, a definition in opposition to the usage
of language, since it is established by common consent that there is a poetry called
descriptive. We deny the charge. Description is not poetry because there is descriptive
poetry, no more than science is poetry because there is such a thing as a didactic poem.
But an object which admits of being described, or a truth which may fill a place in a
scientific treatise, may also furnish an occasion for the generation of poetry, which we
thereupon choose to call descriptive or didactic. The poetry is not in the object itself, nor
in the scientific truth itself, but in the state of mind in which the one and the other may be
contemplated. The mere delineation of the dimensions and colors of external objects is
not poetry, no more than a geometrical ground-plan of St. Peter's or Westminster Abbey
is painting. Descriptive poetry consists, no doubt, in description, but in description of
things as they appear, not as they are; and it paints them, not in their bare and natural
lineaments, but seen through the medium and arrayed in the colors of the imagination set
in action by the feelings. If a poet describes a lion, he does not describe him as a
naturalist would, nor even as a traveler would, who was intent upon stating the truth, the
whole truth, and nothing but the truth. He describes him by imagery, that is, by
suggesting the most striking likenesses and contrasts which might occur to a mind
contemplating a lion, in the state of awe, wonder, or terror, which the spectacle naturally
excites, or is, on the occasion, supposed to excite. Now, this is describing the lion
professedly, but the state of excitement of the spectator really. The lion may be described
falsely or with exaggeration and the poetry be all the better: but, if the human emotion be
not painted with scrupulous truth, the poetry is bad poetry, i.e., is not poetry at all, but a
failure.
Thus far, our progress towards a clear view of the essentials of poetry has brought us very
close to the last two attempts at a definition of poetry which we happen to have seen in
print, both of them by poets, and men of genius. The one is by Ebenezer Elliott, the
author of "Corn-law Rhymes," and other poems of still greater merit. "Poetry," says he,
"is impassioned truth." The other is by a writer in "Blackwood's Magazine," and comes,
we think, still nearer the mark. He defines poetry, "man's thoughts tinged by his feelings."
There is in either definition a near approximation to what we are in search of. Every truth
which a human being can enunciate, every thought, even every outward impression,
which can enter into his consciousness, may become poetry, when shown through any
impassioned medium; when invested with the coloring of joy, or grief, or pity, or
affection, or admiration, or reverence, or awe, or even hatred or terror; and, unless so
colored, nothing, be it as interesting as it may, is poetry. But both these definitions fail to
discriminate between poetry and eloquence. Eloquence, as well as poetry, is impassioned
truth; eloquence, as well as poetry, is thoughts colored by the feelings. Yet common
apprehension and philosophic criticism alike recognize a distinction between the two:
there is much that everyone would call eloquence, which no one would think of classing
as poetry. A question will sometimes arise, whether some particular author is a poet; and
those who maintain the negative commonly allow, that though not a poet, he is a highly
eloquent writer. The distinction between poetry and eloquence appears to us to be equally
fundamental, with the distinction between poetry and narrative, or between poetry and
description, while it is still farther from having been satisfactorily cleared up than either
of the others.
Poetry and eloquence are both alike the expression or utterance of feeling; but, if we may
be excused the antithesis, we should say that eloquence is heard; poetry is overheard.
Eloquence supposes an audience. The peculiarity of poetry appears to us to lie in the
poet's utter unconsciousness of a listener. Poetry is feeling confessing itself to itself in
moments of solitude, and embodying itself in symbols which are the nearest possible
representations of the feeling in the exact shape in which it exists in the poet's mind.
Eloquence is feeling pouring itself out to other minds, courting their sympathy, or
endeavoring to influence their belief, or move them to passion or to action.
All poetry is of the nature of soliloquy. It may be said that poetry which is printed on hot-
pressed paper, and sold at a bookseller's shop, is a soliloquy in full dress and on the stage.
It is so; but there is nothing absurd in the idea of such a mode of soliloquizing. What we
have said to ourselves we may tell to others afterwards; what we have said or done in
solitude we may voluntarily reproduce when we know that other eyes are upon us. But no
trace of consciousness that any eyes are upon us must be visible in the work itself. The
actor know that there is an audience present: but, if he act as although he know it, he acts
ill. A poet may write poetry, not only with the intention of printing it, but for the express
purpose of being paid for it. That, it should be poetry, being written under such
influences, is less probable, not, however, impossible; but no otherwise possible than if
he can succeed in excluding from his work every vestige of such lookings-forth into the
outward and every-day world and can express his emotions exactly as he has felt them in
solitude or as he is conscious that he should feel them, thought they were to remain for
ever unuttered, or (at the lowest) as he knows that others feel them in similar
circumstances of solitude. But when he turns round, and addresses himself to another
person; when the act of utterance is not itself the end, but a means to an end--viz., but the
feelings he himself expresses, to work upon the feelings, or upon the belief or the will of
another; when the expression of his emotions or of his thoughts tinged by his emotions, is
tinged also by that purpose, by that desire of making an impression upon another mind--
then it ceases to be poetry, and becomes eloquence.
Poetry, accordingly, is the natural fruit of solitude and meditation; eloquence, of
intercourse with the world. The persons who have most feeling of their own, if
intellectual culture has given them a language in which to express it, have the highest
faculty of poetry: those who best understand the feelings of others are the most eloquent.
The persons and the nations who commonly excel in poetry are those whose character
and tastes render them least dependent upon the applause or sympathy or concurrence of
the world in general. Those to whom that applause, that sympathy, that concurrence, are
most necessary, generally excel most in eloquence. And hence, perhaps, the French, who
are the least poetical of all great and intellectual nations, are among the most eloquent;
the French also being the most sociable, the vainest, and the least self- dependent.
If the above be, as we believe, the true theory of the distinction commonly admitted
between eloquence and poetry, or even though it be not so, yet if, as we cannot doubt, the
distinction above stated be a real bona fide distinction, it will be found to hold, not
merely in the language of words, but in all other language, and to intersect the whole
domain of art.
Take, for example, music. We shall find in that art, so peculiarly the expression of
passion, two perfectly distinct styles--one of which may be called the poetry, the other the
oratory, of music. This difference, being seized, would put an end to much musical
sectarianism. There has been much contention whether the music of the modern Italian
school, that of Rossini, and his successors, be impassioned or not. Without doubt, the
passion it expresses is not the musing, meditative tenderness or pathos or grief of Mozart
or Beethoven; yet is passion, but garrulous passion, the passion which pours itself into
other ears, and therein the better calculated for dramatic effect, having a natural
adaptation for dialogue. Mozart also is great in musical oratory; but his most touching
compositions are in the opposite style, that of soliloquy. Who can imagine "Dove sono"
heard? We imagine it overheard.
Purely pathetic music commonly partakes of soliloquy. The soul is absorbed in its
distress and, though there may be bystanders, it is not thinking of them. When the mind is
looking within, and not without, its state does not often or rapidly vary; and hence the
even, uninterrupted flow, approaching almost to monotony, which is a good reader or a
good singer will give to words or music of a pensive or melancholy cast. But grief, taking
the form of a prayer or of a complaint, becomes oratorical: no longer low and even and
subdued, it assumes a more emphatic rhythm, a more rapidly returning accent; instead of
a few slow, equal notes, following one after another at regular intervals, it crowds note
upon note, and often assumes a hurry and bustle like joy. Those who are familiar with
some of the best of Rossini's serious compositions, such as the air "Tu che i miseri
conforti," in the opera of "Tancredi," or the duet "Ebben per mia memoria," in "La Gazza
Ladra," will at once understand and feel our meaning. Both are highly tragic and
passionate: the passion of both is that of oratory, not poetry. The like may be said of that
most moving invocation in Beethoven's "Fidelio,"
> > > > "Komm, Hoffnung, lass das letzte Stern
> > > > Der Müde nicht erbleichen"
in which Madame Schröder Devrient exhibited such consummate powers of pathetic
expression. How different from Winter's beautiful "Paga fui," the very soul of
melancholy exhaling itself in solitude! fuller of meaning, and therefore more profoundly
poetical, than the words for which it was composed; for it seems to express, not simple
melancholy, but the melancholy of remorse.
If from vocal music we now pass to instrumental, we may have a specimen of musical
oratory in any fine military symphony or march; while the poetry of music seems to have
attained its consummation in Beethoven's "Overture to Egmont," so wonderful in its
mixed expression of grandeur and melancholy.
In the arts which speak to the eye, the same distinctions will be found to hold, not only
between poetry and oratory, but between poetry, oratory, narrative, and simple imitation
or description.
Pure description is exemplified in a mere portrait or a mere landscape, productions of art,
it is true, but of the mechanical rather than of the fine arts; being works of simple
imitation, not creation. We say, a mere portrait or a mere landscape; because it is possible
for a portrait or a landscape, without ceasing to be such, to be also a picture, like Turner's
landscapes, and the great portraits by Titian or Vandyke.
Whatever in painting or sculpture expresses human feelings--or character, which is only a
certain state of feeling grown habitual--may be called, according to circumstances, the
poetry or the eloquence of the painter's or the sculpture's art: the poetry, if the feeling
declares itself by such signs as escape from us when we are unconscious of being seen;
the oratory, if the signs are those we use for the purpose of voluntary communication.
The narrative style answers to what is called historical painting, which it is the fashion
among connoisseurs to treat as the claims of the pictorial art. That it is the most difficult
branch of the art, we do not doubt, because, in its perfection, it includes the perfection of
all the other branches; as, in like manner, an epic poem though, in so far as it is epic (i.e.
narrative), it is not poetry at all, is yet esteemed the greatest effort of poetic genius,
because there is no kind whatever of poetry which may not appropriately find a place in
it. But an historical picture as such, that is, as the representation of an incident, must
necessarily, as it seems to us, be poor and ineffective. The narrative powers of painting
are extremely limited. Scarcely any picture, scarcely even any series of pictures, tells its
own story without the aid of an interpreter. But it is the single figures, which, to us, are
the great charm even of an historical picture. It is in these that the power of the art is
really seen. In the attempt to narrate, visible and permanent signs are too far behind the
fugitive audible ones, which follow so fast one after another; while the faces and figures
in a narrative picture, even though they be Titian's, stand still. Who would not prefer one
"Virgin and Child" of Raphael to all the pictures which Rubens, with his fat, frouzy
Dutch Venuses, ever painted?--though Rubens, besides excelling almost everyone in his
mastery over the mechanical parts of his art, often shows real genius in grouping his
figures, the peculiar problem of historical painting. But then, who, except a mere student
of drawing and coloring, ever cared to look twice at any of the figures themselves? The
poser of painting lies in poetry, of which Rubens had not the slightest tincture, not in
narrative, wherein he might have excelled.
The single figures, however, in an historical picture, are rather the eloquence of painting
than the poetry. They mostly (unless they are quite out of place in the picture) express the
feelings of one person as modified by the presence of others. Accordingly, the minds
whose bent leads them rather to eloquence than to poetry rush to historical painting. The
French painters, for instance, seldom attempt, because they could make nothing of, single
heads, like those glorious ones of the Italian masters with which they might feed
themselves day after day in their own Louvre. They must all be historical; and they are,
almost to a man, attitudinizers. If we wished to give any young artist the most impressive
warning our imagination could devise against that kind of vice in the pictorial which
corresponds to rant in the histrionic art, we would advise him to walk once up and once
down the gallery of the Luxembourg. Every figure in French painting or statuary seems
to be showing itself off before spectators. They are not poetical, but in the worst style of
corrupted eloquence.
1833, revised 1859